Custom error documentation (#10937)
ethereum/solidity: docs/contracts/errors.rst

.. index:: ! error

.. _errors:

******
Errors
******

Errors in Solidity provide a convenient and gas-efficient way to explain to the

> user why an operation failed. They can be defined inside and outside of contracts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
user why an operation failed. They can be defined inside and outside contracts.
```

::

    // SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0
    pragma solidity >=0.7.0 <0.9.0;

>     /// Insufficient balance for transfer. Needed `required` but only

Reviewer: Just curious: Do we support natspec tags for error documentation as well?

Author: Yes, `@notice`, `@dev` and `@param`

>     /// Insufficient balance for transfer. Needed `required` but only

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    /// Insufficient balance for transfer. Needed  @param required but only
```

Author: This is on purpose: https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.1/natspec-format.html?highlight=natspec#dynamic-expressions

>     /// `available` available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    /// @param available available.
```

    error InsufficientBalance(uint256 available, uint256 required);

    contract TestToken {
        mapping(address => uint) balance;

>         function transfer(address to, uint256 amount) public {

Reviewer: Shouldn't this be `withdraw` for insufficient balance to be appropriate?

Reviewer: Ah I think this is a proxy contract that transfers amount from sender to destination and hence amount should be lte to sender's balance.

Author: I added some more code to clarify.

            require(
                amount <= balance[msg.sender],
                InsufficientBalance({
                    available: balance[msg.sender],
                    required: amount
                })
            );
            // ...
        }

> Errors can only be created inside ``revert`` and ``require`` calls. // TODO link

Reviewer: Caution: TODO :)

If you do not provide any arguments, the error only needs four bytes of
data and you can use NatSpec as above // TODO link
to further explain the reasons behind the error.

More specifically, an error instance is ABI-encoded in the same way as
a function call to a function of the same name and types would be
and then used as the return data in the ``revert`` opcode.

> This mean the data consists of a 4-byte selector and subsequent :ref:`ABI-encoded<abi>` data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This mean that the data consists of a 4-byte selector and subsequent :ref:`ABI-encoded<abi>` data.
```

The selector is the first four bytes of the keccak256-hash of the signature of the error type.

Note that since ``require`` is syntactically just a function call,
all its arguments are evaluated before the function itself is called.
This means that if the arguments to the error cause side-effects,
these side-effects take effect even if the require condition is true.

Before Solidity 0.8.2, only a string could be provided in ``revert`` and ``require``
calls which is usually much more expensive to use.

Using a string in place of an error in ``revert`` and ``require`` calls
will produce an error of the built-in type ``Error(string)``. Similarly, a failing

> ``assert`` or similar conditions will create an error of the built-in type ``Panic(uint256)``.

Reviewer: Perhaps move reference to `Panic` in its own section?

.. index:: ! error

.. _errors:

******
Errors
******

Errors in Solidity provide a convenient and gas-efficient way to explain to the

> user why an operation failed. They can be defined inside and outside of contracts.

Reviewer 2: I think it would be best to mention interfaces and libraries explicitly.

```suggestion
user why an operation failed. They can be defined inside and outside of contracts (including interfaces and libraries).
```

I'd also mention that global errors and errors from libraries can be used anywhere while errors from contracts and interfaces can only be used inside the contract and other contracts derived from it (is that correct?).

Author: No, that's not the case.

::

    // SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0

>     pragma solidity >=0.7.0 <0.9.0;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    pragma solidity ^0.8.2;
```

>     pragma solidity >=0.7.0 <0.9.0;

Reviewer 2: I think we should add an example of an error defined outside of a contract to this snippet for completeness.

>     /// Insufficient balance for transfer. Needed `required` but only
>     /// `available` available.

Reviewer 2: I think we should have the parameters documented here to show people that they can/should document them. [`` `available` `` and `` `required` `` used in the docstring were not meant to be parameter descriptions](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/pull/10937/files?short_path=41763c0#r573636999), but we can still describe them separately:

```suggestion
    /// @notice Insufficient balance for transfer. Needed `required` but only
    /// `available` available.
    /// @param available Actual balance.
    /// @param required Minimum required balance.
```

    error InsufficientBalance(uint256 available, uint256 required);

    contract TestToken {
        mapping(address => uint) balance;
        function transfer(address to, uint256 amount) public {
            if (amount > balance[msg.sender])
                revert InsufficientBalance({
                    available: balance[msg.sender],
                    required: amount
                });
            balance[msg.sender] -= amount;
            // ...
        }

Errors cannot be overloaded or overridden but are inherited.
Instances of errors can only be created in ``revert`` statements.
The error creates data that is then passed to the caller with the revert operation
to either return to the off-chain component or catch it in a try/catch statement.
If you do not provide any parameters, the error only needs four bytes of
data and you can use :ref:`NatSpec <natspec>` as above
to further explain the reasons behind the error, which is not stored on chain.

More specifically, an error instance is ABI-encoded in the same way as
a function call to a function of the same name and types would be
and then used as the return data in the ``revert`` opcode.

> This means that the data consists of a 4-byte selector and subsequent :ref:`ABI-encoded<abi>` data.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This means that the data consists of a 4-byte selector followed by :ref:`ABI-encoded<abi>` data.
```

.. index:: ! error, revert

.. _errors:

*******************************
Errors and the Revert Statement

> *******************************

Reviewer 2: Perhaps we should expand a bit on the recommended usage? E.g. that errors should usually be defined a separate file and imported?

Author: Won't people just figure that out?

Reviewer 2: Some definitely will but I think that showing how we intend the feature to be used might alleviate some frustrations with things that cannot be done. I.e. instead of just telling people they cannot have duplicate error signatures it's better to show them how to use errors without running into that problem in the first place.

Anyway, just a suggestion. I don't think it's critical to the PR but it would be nice to have it.

They have to be used together with the :ref:`revert statement <revert-statement>`
which causes
all changes in the current call to be reverted and passes the error data back to the
caller.

::

    // SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0
    pragma solidity ^0.8.3;

    /// Insufficient balance for transfer. Needed `required` but only
    /// `available` available.
    /// @param available balance available.
    /// @param required requested amount to transfer.
    error InsufficientBalance(uint256 available, uint256 required);

    contract TestToken {
        mapping(address => uint) balance;
        function transfer(address to, uint256 amount) public {
            if (amount > balance[msg.sender])
                revert InsufficientBalance({
                    available: balance[msg.sender],
                    required: amount
                });
            balance[msg.sender] -= amount;
            balance[to] += amount;
        }
        // ...
    }

Errors cannot be overloaded or overridden but are inherited.
The same error can be defined in multiple places as long as the scopes are distinct.

> Instances of errors can only be created in ``revert`` statements.

Reviewer 4: Maybe `...only be created using revert statements.`  sound better

Reviewer 2: Yeah, it would not hurt to state more explicitly that the name of the contract containing the error is not part of its signature. It's the same for events but still, I think it's natural to expect some namespacing here so if there's none we should underscore that fact.

The error creates data that is then passed to the caller with the revert operation

> to either return to the off-chain component or catch it in a try/catch statement.

Reviewer 4: Oha, is it now already possible to try/catch errors?

Reviewer 2: A link to the try/catch docs (`control-structures.rst#try-catch`) would be useful here.

Also, I think that we should explicitly say here that `try`..`catch` will only catch errors produced by external calls, not local reverts. I know it's already mentioned on the `try`..`catch` page but this is very non-intuitive for people coming from other programming languages so it's worth repeating.

If you do not provide any parameters, the error only needs four bytes of
data and you can use :ref:`NatSpec <natspec>` as above
to further explain the reasons behind the error, which is not stored on chain.
This makes this a very cheap and convenient error-reporting feature at the same time.

More specifically, an error instance is ABI-encoded in the same way as
a function call to a function of the same name and types would be
and then used as the return data in the ``revert`` opcode.
This means that the data consists of a 4-byte selector followed by :ref:`ABI-encoded<abi>` data.

> The selector is the first four bytes of the keccak256-hash of the signature of the error type.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The selector consists of the first four bytes of the keccak256-hash of the signature of the error type.
```

The statement ``require(condition, "description");`` is equivalent to
``if (!condition) revert Error("description")``, assuming there is an error
``error Error(string)``, which cannot be defined in user-supplied code because

> it is a built-in type.

Reviewer 2: For me this sentence was a bit hard to understand at first. How about this?
```suggestion
The statement ``require(condition, "description");`` would be equivalent to
``if (!condition) revert Error("description")`` if you could define ``error Error(string)``.
Note, however, that ``Error`` is a built-in type and cannot be defined in user-supplied code.
```

Similarly, a failing ``assert`` or similar conditions will revert with an error
of the built-in type ``Panic(uint256)``.

.. note::
    Error data should only be used to give an indication of failure, but
    not as a means for control-flow. The reason is that the revert data

>     of inner calls is "handed up" by default. This means that an inner call

Reviewer 2: I understand what it means but it still sounds a bit weird. How about this?
```suggestion
    of inner calls is propagated back through the chain of external calls by default. This means that an inner call
```

More specifically, an error instance is ABI-encoded in the same way as
a function call to a function of the same name and types would be
and then used as the return data in the ``revert`` opcode.

> This mean that the data consists of a 4-byte selector and subsequent :ref:`ABI-encoded<abi>` data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that the data consists of a 4-byte selector and subsequent :ref:`ABI-encoded<abi>` data.
```
